[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: All right,
these next four I mention,
we're gonna talk about dealing with lists.
This is a very common refrain that you'll
hear from a functional programmer.
We often times will express
an operation that we're going to do as.
A list operation.
That's true even if there's only
one value, which is interesting.
Even if there's no values.
You can have an empty list that you
express an operation on, in which case,
nothing occurs.
You can have that same list
have one value in it, and
now that operation only
occurs on that one item.
Or that list could have
a million items in it and
the operation's going to be
performed across all one million.
But the nice graceful thing is if I always
deal with an operation in terms of a list
context, I don't need to special case all
those places where it might no value,
or only one value, or
a million values, or a billion.
I don't need to special case
anything because the operation is,
if it's defined as a peer operation,
it doesn't really matter, does it?
So again, you see that referring back
to the notion of pure functions.
If we could define an operation that we
want to apply to every single item in
a list, and
we define that as a peer operation,
then it doesn't matter how many
items are or are not in the list.
It also doesn't even matter.
This is an implementation detail but
just to tweak your brain a little bit,
it also doesn't matter what
order those things happen in.
If I'm going to do a list transformation,
does it really matter whether I go left or
right?
Or start from the middle and go outward?
If I'm using pure functions
it doesn't matter.
As an optimization if you had a gigantic,
gigantic list, like billions of elements.
And you wanted to take advantage
of a bunch of multi-processing and
parallel processing.
A map operation, a transformation
operation with pure functions,
is something that you could send
each one of those things to
entirely different threads,
into a whole bunch of stuff in parallel,
and then assemble everything
back together at the end.
So you can start to see why list
operations are an attraction
abstraction for our programming.
Here we want to talk about
the transformation operation.
Okay?
Transformation.
I don't mean anything
more complex than this.
A transformation is taking one value,
doing something to it so
that you get a different value out.
That's all that I mean.
So what does that entail?
Well the types of transformations
that you could define,
the types of pure transformations that
you could define, are almost limitless.
We've been dealing with numbers because
they're a convenient way of doing so.
So what's a transformation
we can do on a number?
Well, you could take any number and
double it.
That's a transformation.
Double is a transformation.
You can take any number and
divide it by three.
That's a transformation.
You can take any number and
increment it by one.
You get the point?
You get to find a whole bunch of
different mathematic transformations,
pure transformations on a value.
A key characteristic here,
a transformation what is called in
functional programming a mapping or
a map is you are going to end up with
a new list at the end that has
exactly the same number of values as
the original list whatever they are empty,
one, or a billion.
And for every single value in
the new list there's a one to one
mapping from the original
value to the new value.
And that mapping is done with
the function that you provide,
your pure transformation, okay?
That's what a transformation, that's
what a list transformation looks like.
What if we wanted to write
our own transform function?
How would we do that?
Probably not too surprising.
We first define on line 1 a doubleIt.
There's our pure transform function.
Okay?
Functional programming terms,
they often use this fancy word
called predicate, who cares, right?
It's just a function that does something.
It's a pure function.
So I'm not going to talk
about predicates but
that if you've read functional programming
you might have seen that word before.
All right so double it.
Takes in v multiplies by
2 returns the value back.
Doesn't get anymore simple than that.
I'm sure somebody out there is like
why didn't he use an arrow function.
I've got a lot of writing about why
I didn't use an arrow function.
But transform is the one
we wanna pay attention to.
Transform takes an array,
and a function reference.
Whatever, doesn't matter
what the function is, right?
This is a general utility
that we call transform.
And you notice, by the way,
that I intentionally use an immutable
programming technique here.
Which is, that I declare a new value,
a new list, and I add to that new list.
As opposed to operating in place.
Changing the existing array.
If I operated in place, I could come
up with the same end result but
I would not be doing
functional programming.
Because I would not have used
that immutable technique.
Do you get the point.
Everything we are talking about
is all building upon itself here.
We are starting to see why immutable
is important for us to understand
not as a characteristic of a value but
as a characteristic of how we use a value.
So here we choose to use it in
an immutable fashion, not change it but
just simply iterate over it with a for
loop.
So I can pass in my array, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 like I do on line 12.
And a reference to any given function,
in this case doubleIt and
what I get back is a whole new array.
Where that transformation has
been applied across all of them.
And for our intents and purposes,
we don't care how the engine did that.
We don't care that it was a linear loop.
Could have done it recursively.
I bet if I have you the exercise
to write a recursive map you
could probably figure out how
to write a recursive map.
Either if it's a little bit more
illustrative here but this could have been
done recursively, it could have been done
massively parallel on different threads.
It doesn't matter to us, does it?
All that matters is that,
it's a pure function.
It's a pure transform.
On the outside, on the end result, we
get a whole new list with the transforms
having them occurred in every single
time we do that exact same transform,
we're going to get the same result.
So we could make our
own transform utility,
thankfully the language provides one for
us.
Now some people have quibbles about
this particular utility because it was
implemented as a prototype
method on the array.
It's called map.
I like the name I ca see why it's very
JavaScript to have it be a method so
it automatic ally knows its context
you don't have to pass in the value.
Function programmers will tell you.
I have to pass it as a context method
instead of passing in the array that
I care about?
You know why this is considered to be
a violation of functional programming?
What did I talk about earlier today
where this would create a problem?
Can anybody spot it?
>> Speaker 2: Exchanging the array itself,
and not returning?
>> Kyle: No, it's not actually.
It's actually returning
us a whole new array.
That's good, so it's not the thing.
There's a different problem here.
>> Speaker 2: It can not be counted?
>> Kyle: What's that?
>> Kyle: I think you're on the right
lines, let me just take
that one step further.
It makes it harder to compose, doesn't it?
Composing with these is done through
chaining, which is a different kind of
composition than what we talked about
before, which is we take one function and
we take its result and
pump it into another function.
If I take this function and I try to
pump it in as the parameter to another
function, it doesn't really
work that well, does it?
So I end up having to
chain off of the value.
That's the way, the Java Scripty way,
we do composition and
functional programmers always
look at that as yucky.
You can accomplish many
of the same things.
I can understand why
this form of composition,
the method type of composition
can be less attractive.
There are places where you end
up having to do extra work
in the wrappers you create that a truly
functional programming language wouldn't
have to worry about those details.
Just something to be aware of but
the nice thing is it's super easy to use.
It's a method available
on all of our arrays.
And if you're familiar with
that fluent style of api that
chaining style where you call one method
then call another method and all that.
If you're familiar with that
method that form of composition
pretty straight forward.
That's exactly what your hoping for right.
So map is going to yes create
a whole new array for us.
Just like our transform did.
And return that as the return value here.
Which means if we wanted to do
two mappings we could do one map.
At the end of line three we could call
dot map again and we'd be operating
on the second array, the newly created
array, and we'd return a third array.
You can chain these things together,
that's how you can
compose these operations.
Side note, functional programming talks
about this notion of being able to take
two mappings, for example,
two mapping functions like double it, so
maybe there's a double it function and
maybe there's an add one function.
Two independent mappings that we
might produce over a set of lists.
You could say .map(doubleIt).map add 1.
You're gonna get the end result.
You're gonna get an array that
has everything doubled plus 1.
but implementation wise you're going
to have to run through that list twice.
You're going to create an intermediary
ray that nobody cares about because it
just gets thrown away.
Implementation wise there
are some things to be desired.
So functional programming will talk to
you more in depth about this notion of
composing the with an add one function.
You compose those two functions
into one single function, so
that I do both mappings at the same time.
That also has fancy terminology
that we won't get into, but just so
your brain knows where to be looking
at putting little bookmarks there for
you as you study functional
programming more.
That's one of those places.
If you see your self doing dot map,
dot map, dot map, dot filter, and
doing a big old chain of things.
There are ways to compose those
different steps together and
have higher efficiency with
your implementation, okay?
So there's our transformation.
Any questions about transformation,
mapping?
It's pretty straightforward.
I use maps a lot.
it's very, very useful.
Transformations can be almost
anything that you can imagine.
So here we're transforming numerically.
What would a transformation of strings be.
Well, we could do string concatenation or
we could upper case everything,
all the characters in a string.
So if you had an array of strings and
you wanted to lower case everything
you could pass in a function that takes
a value and returns the lower case of it.
That would be your predicate,
that would be your transformer function,
and then just simply map
over your array strings.
You can have even
hierarchical transformations.
This is harkening to some stuff that we'll
talk about when we do an a synchronous
programming workshop.
But in the a synchronous programming
workshop, we'll talk about even the notion
that ideas like,
what about transforming a function?
What would it mean to
transform a function?
What might need to wrap that
function in something else that does
something different.
So I take a function in and
I get a new function out that
does something different.
What would it mean to transform a promise?
Well transforming a promise could
be like taking a promise and
wrapping it around another promise or
performing some operation.
So whatever value you start with,
there is a set of things that you can do
with that value that are transformations.
And you might wanna model that in your
program and simply putting one or
more of those values into a list and
using one of these functional tools
like math to do the transforms.
So, makes sense?
Excellent.
All right.
So, that's transformation.